{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf949\cocoasubrtf430
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc2\leveljcn2\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid0\'02\'05.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww17780\viewh15580\viewkind1\viewscale150
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 HOBOware Pro & Lite for PC and Mac, Version 2.7.3 README\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\b0 \cf0 \
Last updated March 27, 2009\
\
Welcome to HOBOware.  This version of HOBOware is available to customers of Onset Computer Corporation under the terms of the License Agreement contained in the installation programs.  This agreement is also available via the Onset Web site at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://%22h"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 \ul \ulc2 www.onsetcomp.com/legal}}.\
\
This README file is available on the Onset Web site in languages other than English, at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.onsetcomp.com/support/updates"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 \ul \ulc2 www.onsetcomp.com/support/updates}} - scroll to the bottom of the page and click on the link for the README file. \
___________________________\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\b \cf0 Installation of HOBOware Pro & Lite Software:
\b0 \
\
PC Users: Please double-click "HOBOware_Setup.exe" and follow the instructions. If you do not have a supported version of Java (1.5_15 or later) installed, the installer will download and install it for you.  HOBOware will inform you if your Java version is not up to date.  Please see the note below regarding the latest version of Java.\
\
Mac Users: The procedure will vary depending on whether you are working from a product CD or a downloaded installer file.  If using a CD, please double-click "HOBOware.pkg" and follow the instructions.  If you have downloaded the installer, please double-click the file named  HOBOware_Installer.dmg, then double-click the HOBOware.pkg file.  You must have a supported version of Java (1.4.2 or later) already installed.\
\
___________________________\
\

\b Installation of HOBOware Update:
\b0 \
\
PC Users: Please double-click "HOBOware_Updater.exe" and follow the instructions.  You must have HOBOware currently installed for the Updater to run properly.  Please see the note below regarding the latest version of Java.\
\
Mac Users: Please double-click "HOBOware_Updater.dmg file, then double-click the HOBOware_Updater.pkg file and follow the instructions.  You must have HOBOware currently installed for the Updater to run properly.\
\
___________________________\
\

\b Please Note:\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\b0 \cf0 \
Sample datafiles are contained in the installer and updater, and are also on the CD.  On the PC, these files are also installed in the user's My Documents\\HOBOware directory.  On the Mac, these files are installed in the user's Library/Application Support/HOBOware folder.\
\
The latest distribution of the Java Runtime Environment (JRE) available from Sun Microsystems at the time of this HOBOware release is also supplied on the HOBOware product CD, in the Java-JRE folder.\
\
___________________________\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\b \cf0 System Requirements:
\b0 \
\
* PC: Windows XP Pro, Windows XP Home, Vista Business, Vista Home Premium\
\
* Mac: OS X Versions 10.4.x and 10.5.x.  This version of HOBOware may run on OS X 10.3.9 but this OS version is no longer supported. \
\
* Sun Java Runtime Environment (JRE) 1.5 or 1.6.   Please note that version 1.6, also known as Java 6, is not officially supported on OS X.  See the time zone note below.\
\
* One of the following Internet browsers (version number listed is the highest version we tested): Safari 2.0, Firefox 2.0 or greater, Netscape 8.1, Opera 9.10, Microsoft Internet Explorer 7.0 or later.  Flash plugin recommended. \
\
* Minimum screen resolution of 800x600 (PC) or 1024x768 (Mac)\
\
* 256+ colors\
\
* Minimum 256 MB memory\
\

\b NOTICE\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\b0 \cf0 \
HOBOware 2.7 is built with Java 1.5.0_15 on Windows, 1.5.0_16 on OS X.  While HOBOware may run using a previous or later version of the Java JRE, version 1.5.0_15 and 1.5.0_16 are recommended as a baseline.  Use of Java v1.4.x and versions of Java 5 prior to updates 15 and 16 are specifically no longer supported.  Regardless of the Java runtime version in use it is up to every user to ensure that their Java installation is up to date regarding the Olson Timezone Database for their locale.  Please see this article on the Sun Website that discusses the topic:  \
	
\f1 http://java.sun.com/javase/timezones/
\f0 \
\
HOBOware 2.7 on Mac is built for OS X 10.4 as a minimum.  While HOBOware may run using a previous version of OS X, earlier versions of OS X are specifically no longer supported.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\b \cf0 New Features / Bug Fixes added in HOBOware 2.7.3
\b0 \
\
* This release provides a correction for a problem when using the Killowatt Hour Data Assistant, but not selecting all three new series.  The problem appears when reading saved data files read from the logger after the logger is launched using the Pre-Set Data Assistant feaure.  Specifically, the logger must be launched after using the kWh Data Assistant to create or edit one or more parameter sets (see the kWh Data Assistant User's Guide, document # 10571-E or later for details), then read out and saved.  Attempting to open the file would report that the file contained no channel data.  Re-launching the logger without manipulating the Pre-Set Data Assistant parameters would cure the problem.  HOBOware 2.7.3 corrects the problem.\
\
_________________________\
\

\b Known Issues:\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\b0 \cf0 \
* HOBOware 2.7 provides the means to run several of the Data Assistants at Launch time, caching the operating parameters from the Data Assistants in the logger header and using them at readout time to automatically generate new, derived series.  When a logger is launched, these parameters are cached in the logger header, but versions of HOBOware Pro prior to version 2.7 do not know how to interpret this data.  While the pre-2.7 Status screen will properly show the channel data, the plotting will be unable to interpret the data channels and will report that there are no data channels to be plotted.  The best way to deal with this is to ensure, to the extent possible, that everyone who will need to access these files with cached Data Assistant data is running HOBOware 2.7.\
\
* You may experience distorted graphics in HOBOware is you are running Java version 1.6.0_10 on Windows.  To alleviate this issue, update to the latest version of Java at http://sun.java.com\
\
* When running on a non-English desktop there is the remote possibility that you may encounter a problem bringing up the Launch screen.  This has been found to be a conflict in a few locales when using the 12-hour time format, and has been corrected for all tested locales.  To get around the problem should you encounter it please go to Preferences, and under the Display category, in the Date/Time section, change the Time Format to 24-hour.\
\
* From the Export Preferences pane, if selecting the option, \'93Include location string or sensor serial number (if available),\'94 in order to export the location string, you must also select the option, \'93Include sensor Location (if available) in points table and details pane,\'94 in the Plotting Preferences pane.\
\
* Bulk Export Tool (BET) is affected by both the settings under Preferences > Display > Date/Time and the settings under Preferences > General > Export Settings depending on what you've selected as a column separator. \
\
If the Export preferences are set to semi-colon or tab as a separator (and thus creating a .txt file), then BET uses the Date/Time settings under Display, overriding any date/time settings in Export Settings.\
\
If the Export preferences are set to comma (and thus creating a .csv file),\
then BET uses the Date/Time settings under Export Settings, ignoring settings under Date/Time.\
\
* When running in a French locale please be aware that the keyboard accelerator keys have not been changed to adapt to the French language.  For example, the key to select the crosshair tool when plotting is C regardless of the language of the user interface. Please see the application Help for details on these accelerator keys.  \
\
* It has been reported that the NOD32 virus detection program from ESET.com reports an embedded Win32/Adware.LastDefender spyware application in the HOBOwarePro_Updater.exe program.  This has been reviewed with ESET and has been identified as a false positive.  To our knowledge, after scanning the installer and updater programs prior to releasing them, there is no spyware or malware embedded in our installers or updaters.\
\
* When launching a HOBO Pendant with only events enabled (no temp, no battery logging), HOBOware correctly sets the sampling interval to one hour (so the battery doesn't drain) but incorrectly sets the internal information used by shuttles to re-launch the logger to a one-second interval. This is OK for the initial launch, but if the logger is re-launched with either the U-DT-1 or U-DTW-1 shuttle it starts "logging" at one second, draining the battery.  It isn't logging data since it isn't supposed to, but it does wake up once a second, causing the battery to drain faster than expected.\
\
* The new icon(s) may not show up immediately after installation.  Generally this will fix itself after a few reboots.\
\
* Plots with series which logged over the Spring or Fall time change will not display the time change.\
\
* Occasionally HOBOware may report that communications with the logger failed - just retry the operation.\
\
*If memory gets too low, the points table may not draw itself.  Try closing any open plots.  This should not occur until at least 1,000,000 data points are displayed.\
\
* While in a locale which formats numbers as follows "123 456 789,00", when entering a number in an input field, do not use the spacebar to input the grouping separator. The grouping separator is a no-break space character, and the spacebar will insert a space character, which the input field will treat as an invalid character. It is best to enter the number without any grouping separator(s) and when you leave the input field, the value will format itself correctly.\
\
* HOBOware does not support file attachments. If you use HOBOware to read out a logger with a file that was attached using another application that supports U-Series loggers (Onset GreenLine software), the attachment will be saved with the datafile, but you will need to open the datafile in the original application to access the attachment. If you use HOBOware to launch a logger that has an attached file, the attached file will not be retained.\
\
* When a serial logger (HOBO Weather Station, HOBO Micro Station, HOBO FlexSmart) is awaiting an interval, delayed, or button start, the sensor readings are not updated in the Status window. This is a hardware limitation. When logging begins, sensor readings will update as usual.\
\
* At low screen resolutions (800x600), plots with many series (and therefore many Y axes), may initially display too small.  A message "Plot Panel Too Small" will display across the plot when this occurs.  To see the plot, try maximizing HOBOware to full screen size.  If this does not work, try hiding the details pane and points table.\
\
* Changing the units of a series using the right-click menu item "Convert Series Units" will work for everything except the Y-axis values used by that series. Use the Main Menu item "Edit | Convert Units" or the Toolbar button "Convert units for all series" instead.\
\
* The Subset Statistics tool shows the start and end time of the interval as if the Time Zone is Eastern Standard Time in the Plot Window. The time is shown correctly in the Details Pane in the Axis: Time details.\
\
* The HOBO U14 can be launched with neither the Temperature channel nor the Relative Humidity channel selected, although there will be a warning about this condition. The logger will continue to display current conditions of those channels but no data will be logged and alarms will not work.\
\
* The battery state for the HOBO U23 loggers (-001, -002, -003 and -004 versions) is shown as Good at battery voltages above 2.85 V. The battery state should be shown as Good only when the voltage reads 3.1 V or higher.\
\
* Users of the H22 HOBO Energy Logger Pro may find that they are warned, "The battery voltage on this logger is too low to use excitation power." This warning is sometimes given even when the battery voltage is high enough to supply excitation power. We suggest that you make your own decision based on the voltage reading from the Status Dialog or from the battery gauge near the top of the Launch Dialog.\
\
That dialog's warning should not be confused with the dialog whose text, "This logger's battery is very low..." is only issued when the logger battery is dangerously low. You should NOT ignore this dialog's warning.\
\
* The Bulk Export Tool preferences may not show up in the Preferences window under some circumstances.  Closing the Preferences window and re-opening usually corrects the problem.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\b \cf0 \
Windows Only:\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\b0 \cf0 \
* HOBOware users should have administrator privileges on their PC. In order to Map/Unmap file types in HOBOware you'll need administrator privileges otherwise you get a series of "error modifying registry" messages.\
\
* When configuring HOBOware for use by multiple users on the same PC, the administrator should copy all of their HOBOware folder's contents to each user's Documents\\HOBOware folder. Otherwise, users will not have access to the sample HOBO files, text files or any of the FlexSmart configuration files.\
\
* If the logger you plug in has never been seen by your computer before, the Found New Hardware balloon will appear next to the Windows Taskbar and any default action on plug will not work.  If you wait until the system informs you the device is ready and unplug the logger and plug it back in, the default action on plug will then happen.\
\
* By default, HOBOware maps all .hobo and .dtf files to itself.  This will remove the mapping from GreenLine or BoxCar Software.  If you would like to remap the file types to the original software, use the Map/Unmap buttons in the General pane of HOBOware Preferences.\
\
* Occasionally, the Map/Unmap buttons in Preferences may produce an error message.  Simply click the button again and the mapping should proceed properly.\
\
* When exporting points to Excel, it is possible that the resultant Excel file may not open in the exact same format when opened in Excel on a Macintosh system.\
\
* When exporting details to text, it is possible that the resultant text file may not open in the exact same format when opened in a text editor on a Macintosh system.\
\
* As described in the manual, bitmap images of the graph can be pasted directly into many applications. However, additional steps are needed to paste the graph into a WordPad document. Follow these steps:\
	To paste the graph into WordPad:\
\pard\tx360\tx1080\pardeftab720\li1080\fi-360\ri0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 	From the Insert menu, choose Object.\
	In the Insert Object dialog, click the Create New button.\
	Choose Bitmap Image from the list. Click OK. This should create a frame in your document.\
	From the Edit menu, choose Paste. The graph should appear within the frame.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\b \cf0 Windows Vista Only:\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\b0 \cf0 \
* By default, HOBOware maps relevant file types to itself, see note above.  When using Vista it is not possible to change your file associations for the .hobo and/or .dtf file types.  In HOBOware Preferences, the File Associations section of the General tab will yield an error when clicking the Map and/or UnMap buttons.\
\
* While at the time of this writing there are both 32 and 64 bit Vista-compatible Keyspan drivers available from Keyspan\'92s website for the Keyspan USB-to-serial USA-19HS, there are no Vista-compatible Keyspan drivers available for the older USA-19QW adapter. The Keyspan Serial Assistant won't recognize the device, nor does Vista.  Please ensure that if you need to use a Keyspan USB-to-serial adapter you are using the USA-19HS device.\
\
* At the time of this writing there is Vista-compatible device management software for Tibbo devices, but with limitations. This includes the Virtual Serial Port Manager, Connection Wizard and Device Server Manager.  Please see the Tibbo web site for details (www.tibbo.com) \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\b \cf0 \
Mac Only:\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0

\b0 \cf0 \
* Starting with version 2.7 the HOBOware installer and updater now place associated files under the user's Library/Application Support/HOBOware folder.  Previous versions placed these files in the user's Documents folder, which Apple installation guidelines recommend against.  \
\
* Note that as of version 2.6.0 of HOBOware, OS X 10.3 (Panther) and previous are no longer officially supported.  On older versions of OS X v10.3 you may experience non-standard behavior, such as clicking and dragging the mouse anywhere in a window causing that window to move around the screen.  This is due to problems with the operating system.  We recommend that you perform the free Apple Software Update and install OS X v10.3.9 to avoid these problems.\
\
* The original version of the Pendant Base Station has a known issue that results in slower communications with versions of HOBOware for Mac.  This will not affect the validity of the data.  Pendant Base Stations with serial numbers below #961469 are affected.  The serial number is visible through the clear plastic of the Base Station on a white label.  Please check periodically for an update to HOBOware that addresses this issue, or contact Onset Computer Corporation Technical Support (www.onsetcomp.com) for a free replacement Pendant Base Station.\
\
* At times, it is possible that the HOBOware menu enters a disabled state, where the items in the menu are disabled. If you restart HOBOware, the menu will return to its normal state. Be sure to save any unsaved data before restarting HOBOware.\
\
* When exporting points to Excel, please be aware that the resultant Excel file may not open in the exact same format when opened in Excel on a Windows system.\
\
* When exporting details to text, please be aware that the resultant text file may not open in the exact same format when opened in a text editor on a Windows system.\
\
* HOBOware will allocate up to 384 MB of memory for itself (even though only 256 MB is required), if it needs it.  In the unlikely event that HOBOware attempts to allocate more memory than this, it may occasionally lock up or display communications errors.  This has been seen only when many plots of full loggers are displayed.  If you are experiencing these problems, you can increase the amount of memory that HOBOware uses by running "HOBOware Memory Adjuster.app".   This program can be downloaded from Onset's website by navigating to http://www.onsetcomp.com/Support/support.html and selecting Software FAQs.\
\
* HOBOware for Mac may experience problems when using a Keyspan USB to Serial Adapter that is attached to a USB hub.  It is recommended that Keyspan USB to Serial adapters be attached directly to the USB port on the computer to avoid this issue.\
\
* On OS X v10.5 (Leopard), the Apple Help icons found in some HOBOWare dialogs may not work if your default Web Browser (Safari or Firefox) is not already open.  In some cases this may cause HOBOware to crash. If you experience this problem please update to the latest version of OS X.\
\
___________________________\
\
Questions or comments?  Please direct to Onset Computer Corporation at \
1-800-LOGGERS (1-800-564-4377) or support@onsetcomp.com\
}